Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about Karl Lagerfeld
- one of the most influential fashion
designers of the 20th and 21st centuries.
His story is one of incredible
creativity, eccentricity, and
a talent for seeing the future.
He enjoyed one of the longest and
most successful careers in fashion
history, working with some of the most
iconic fashion houses in the world,
yet it’s also the story of a man who
didn’t quite live up to his potential
when it came to his own fashion house.
So, let’s get right into it, and
talk about the life and times of
Karl Lagerfeld, the man sometimes
called “Kaiser Karl” or simply Karl.
If you’re interested in fashion, the name
Karl Lagerfeld probably rings a bell.
You might be familiar with his signature
look - powdered white hair, tied back in
a ponytail, dark sunglasses, high white
collared shirts, fingerless gloves, and
multiple silver rings on both hands.
You may also know that he was considered
responsible for revitalising Chanel,
transforming it from a dusty and
outdated fashion house to a cultural
icon worth over 10 billion dollars.
But how did this man come to
dominate the world of fashion?
Why was he so influential?
More importantly, what
legacy did he leave us with?
Well, let’s find out.
Karl Lagerfeld was born into a wealthy
family in Hamburg in Germany, in 1933.
Interestingly enough, though, he
would always claim to have been born
later, to try to make people believe
that he was younger than he was.
From a young age, he was a
talented artist, and moved to Paris
when he was only 14 years old.
It didn’t take long for his
fashion career to take off.
When he was just 21, he
submitted a coat design to an
international design competition.
His design won, and the coat was
produced by Pierre Balmain, the
Parisian designer who founded what would
become the now-iconic label, Balmain.
Afterwards, Balmain offered him
a job as his assistant - and
so began his apprenticeship in
the world of luxury fashion.
Lagerfeld, however, wouldn’t be
the only fashion designer to come
out of this 1954 competition.
A Frenchman two years younger than
Lagerfeld would win the cocktail
dress category, and this man would
go on to have a lifelong friendship
and rivalry with the German.
The Frenchman’s name
was Yves Saint Laurent.
But while Yves Saint Laurent’s
career first went in a haute couture
direction, Lagerfeld was more interested
in a different sort of designing:
he wanted to be a ready-to-wear
designer of high-end clothes.
To briefly explain the difference,
haute couture, or “high fashion”, if
you directly translate it from the
French, involves creating specially
tailored clothing for each individual.
For each piece of clothing, there
is a great deal of time, attention,
and skill that goes into it.
Everything is custom-made, and is
traditionally constructed by hand,
from the beginning to the end.
The clothes are typically constructed from
high quality and often unusual fabric, and
the result of this is a beautiful piece of
clothing with a suitably large price tag.
Ready-to-wear-clothing, which is what
Karl Lagerfeld wanted to design, is the
opposite, at least in some respects.
The design is created, different
sizes are designed, small, medium and
large, and then it’s mass produced,
or at least multiple versions of
the same piece of clothing are made.
It’s how almost all clothes are now
made and sold, and allows normal
people with normal sized wallets to
buy and wear the clothes they want.
Sure, Lagerfeld’s dream wasn’t to design
plain white t-shirts to be sold for a few
Euros, but he wanted to design clothes
that were ready-to-wear, or “off the peg”.
As a high-end fashion designer,
Lagerfeld’s decision to move from haute
couture to ready-to-wear clothes was seen
as unusual, bold, and maybe even foolish.
It simply wasn’t what was done - the
clothes weren’t as exclusive, and
it was believed that you were less
likely to win critical acclaim.
Some designers also thought
that ready-to-wear clothing
gave them less creative freedom.
Lagerfeld, however, felt differently.
He chose to move from haute couture to
ready-to-wear precisely because he thought
it would give him more creative freedom.
Now, this might seem counterintuitive.
You would think that designing for
just one person, as you do with haute
couture, might allow for more creative
freedom, more self expression, as you
don’t need to worry about things like
people of slightly different sizes
wearing the same clothes, or about more
practical aspects of fashion design.
But Lagerfeld believed that
culturally and stylistically,
haute couture was more restrictive.
He said that haute couture was stuck
in the past, it was too traditional.
He wanted more room to
play, to experiment.
So, in 1962, when he was not yet
even 30, Lagerfeld moved away from
working exclusively in couture houses.
By doing so, he freed himself
up to experiment more with his
designs - and as we’ll see, it was
this risk-taking, innovative approach
to fashion that would make him so
influential later on in his career.
In 1964, he moved from Paris to Rome
to study art history, to pursue what
would become a lifelong preoccupation
with the romance of the old world
- especially of 18th century France.
And while he was studying in Rome,
he worked on a freelance basis
for some of the biggest names in
fashion - a few you might know, like
Chloé, Valentino and Charles Jourdan.
This work started to get him noticed,
and in 1965 he would embark on his
longest ever collaboration with
the Italian fashion house, Fendi.
This was a collaboration that would
last 54 years, and would be called
“fashion’s greatest love story”.
In fact, if you have heard of Fendi,
it’s likely in no small part due
to the work of Karl Lagerfeld.
His designs for Fendi were often
very unconventional, very risky.
He pioneered the use of rabbit and
squirrel fur in his designs - and this
had never been done in fashion before.
He also started to use
fur in everyday garments.
Before that, fur was only
typically worn on formal occasions.
But these risks paid off.
With his creative direction,
Lagerfeld helped bring Fendi from
a small, family run business into
the premier name in luxury furs.
It would be only the first
of many successes, all very
different stylistically.
See, unlike many of his contemporaries,
Lagerfeld didn’t really have a signature
style as a designer, and he wasn’t
known for any one kind of design.
Instead, he was celebrated for being a
visionary creator - someone who could see
the direction fashion was going in, and
was able to adapt, and invent, to keep up.
Nowhere was this more needed
than in the case of Chanel.
The house of Chanel had been in
slow decline after the death of its
legendary founder, Coco, in 1971.
It was criticised as becoming
irrelevant, unable to stay culturally
important in the modern world.
So, in 1982, Lagerfeld, then about to turn
50, was asked to help modernise the label.
In an interview, he said that
everyone told him not to take the job.
They told him that the house of Chanel
was “dead, it will never come back”.
But he was a man who liked a
challenge, and he took the job.
He elevated classic Chanel looks,
and made them look something that
was more relevant to the times.
Now, when you think of Chanel, you might
be thinking of its iconic branding - the
letter C, interlocked, back to back.
That was Lagerfeld’s invention.
He monogrammed this logo onto everything
- on bags, on belts, on jewellery.
And in so doing, he made the interlocked
Cs one of the most recognisable
designs in the world of high fashion.
What’s more, he revamped all of the
classic Chanel designs - the little
black dress, the skirts and jackets.
He injected something new into them, and
was instrumental in bringing Chanel back
to relevance, turning it into one of
the largest luxury brands in the world.
And in terms of where he got his
inspiration from, his answer would
have been “anywhere and everywhere”.
It could be the French aristocracy of
the 18th century, but it could equally be
from a child he saw playing on the street.
He was one of the very first designers
to understand that fashion didn’t
always come from above, that the latest
trends didn’t come from exclusive,
high fashion ateliers, and could
instead come from unexpected places.
For example, he recognized the
increasing popularity of hip-hop
as an important influence in
couture - and so he introduced
athleisure to the designs at Chanel.
So, in this way, he blurred
the lines between what was
considered high and low fashion.
He was also the first luxury
fashion designer to collaborate
with fast fashion retailers.
In 2004, he collaborated with the
Swedish high-street brand H&M on a hugely
successful ready-to-wear collection.
Nowadays, these kinds of collaborations
tend to be extremely popular and typically
sell out in hours, and Lagerfeld was the
first to do this kind of collaboration.
Now, another important factor in
Lagerfeld’s creative philosophy
and success was that he was early
to  understand the importance of
technology and social media when it
comes to fashion and the latest trends.
He designed his sets for fashion
shows with an awareness of how
Instagrammable they might be, so
they were specially designed to
look amazing in a photo or a video.
When you walked into one of
Lagerfeld’s runway shows, you
would never know what to expect.
You might see models on roller
skates, or carrying surfboards.
You might see a set that looks like a
supermarket, with fully stocked shelves.
You might see a fake beach, complete
with waves that lap across the sand.
Lagerfeld knew that people were taking
photos of the sets and posting them on
social media, so he made the backdrops
as visually stunning as he could.
Now, when it comes to his personal
life,  it's certainly fair to
say that he was an eccentric.
Famously, he was a big fan of the iPod
- but he didn’t have just one or two.
He had literally hundreds of iPods in
his personal collection, all loaded
with different kinds of music, so he
would pick one up and press play, with
his favourite playlists pre-loaded.
And his own design work
was not limited to fashion.
He designed everything - from pianos to
a hotel with his name on it, in Macau.
He owned a bookshop in Paris, and had his
own personal library, which is estimated
to contain more than 300,000 volumes.
He was also an avid photographer,
and filmed advertising campaigns
for Chanel and Fendi as well
as for his own Lagerfeld label.
As you might expect for such a
high-end fashion designer, he also
lived a life of considerable luxury.
He didn’t really drink alcohol,
because he said it made him sleepy.
But he did have another vice, one that
no doubt his dentist didn’t approve of.
From the minute he woke up until
the minute he went to sleep, he
would constantly drink Diet Coke.
Not out of a can or a bottle, of course.
No.
No way.
His assistant said that Lagerfeld
drank Coke only out of crystal
Baccarat glasses, and that his Coke
had to be refilled every 30 minutes.
The eccentricities didn’t stop there.
Lagerfeld had always said that his
closest companion was his cat, Choupette.
Choupette had, and still has, in fact
over 100,000 followers on Instagram
- and in interviews, he said that if
he could marry his cat, he would.
Choupette was said to have two
personal maids to tend to her needs,
and most shockingly, Lagerfeld said
in an interview that Choupette earned
3 million euros for participating
in two commercial projects in 2014.
He never married, and had an 18-year
relationship with a man, a French
aristocrat called Jacques de Bascher.
But despite being gay himself, Lagerfeld
spoke out against same-sex marriage,
saying he thought it was wrong.
Clearly, this confused many and
rubbed people up the wrong way.
But Lagerfeld was never afraid
to speak his mind, even when he
had controversial viewpoints.
He offended people when he spoke
out against the #MeToo movement,
when he said that he thought the
singer Adele was too fat, and when he
suggested that it was a mistake for
Germany to accept Syrian immigrants.
While he might not have cared much about
speaking his mind and rubbing someone up
the wrong way, Lagerfeld took extreme care
to never be seen publicly looking anything
less than perfect, than immaculate.
If you’ve seen pictures of him,
you’ll remember him with perfect
white hair in a ponytail, normally
with black sunglasses, high white
collared shirts, and fingerless gloves.
According to his assistant, his skincare
regime included covering himself
from head to toe, twice a day, in La
Prairie - which is one of the most
expensive creams in the world, and
contains caviar, platinum and gold.
In the year 2000, shortly before his 70th
birthday, he went on a famous diet that
caused him to lose 42 kilos in 13 months
During this diet, he ate only 1200
calories a day… and washed it all
down with lots and lots of, well you
might have guessed it, Diet Coke.
And his motivation for losing all
of this weight wasn’t for health
reasons or anything like that.
It was, as with everything to do
with Lagerfeld, related to fashion.
He said that one of the reasons he wanted
to lose weight was so that he could
wear certain clothes - specifically
suits by the Dior Homme line.
And this brings us on to, perhaps,
one of the most interesting and
unexpected things about Karl Lagerfeld.
He had created his own “Karl Lagerfeld”
ready-to-wear fashion label in 1984.
It did do ok, and  was eventually
sold to Tommy Hilfinger.
But he was much more famous for working
for other labels, and indeed, the reason
he wanted to lose so much weight wasn’t
because he wanted to wear suits from the
House of Karl Lagerfeld, but from Dior.
All this being said, while the
House of Karl Lagerfeld was not his
defining legacy, the name of Karl
Lagerfeld has left an astounding
legacy on the world of fashion.
He spent 54 years at
Fendi, and 36 at Chanel.
He died in February of 2019, aged
85, and tributes poured in from some
of the biggest names in fashion.
His designs were revolutionary,
his character larger than life,
his sense of the future unmatched.
He was a man whose motto
was, very aptly, “embrace the
present and invent the future”.
OK then, that is it for today’s episode,
on the life and legacy of Karl Lagerfeld.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
If you would consider yourself a
fashionista, what do you think of the
designs and work of Karl Lagerfeld?
How do you think he compares to
some of the other great designers
of the 20th and 21st centuries?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.